Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
As a machine gunner with the 86th Black Hawk Division in Europe, Ray Valigura of Bryan bravely fought in World War II and then after its end saw the horror of World War II up close.
While his memories of the war include the camaraderie of the 86th, they just as sharply focused on the remains of the concentration camps and the POW camps that his unit helped liberate.
He'll tell you that as a youth he didn't much think about it, but today the recollections flood back.
Assigned to General Patton's Third Army, in his march through Europe, the 86 Blackhawks was the first unit that returned home after the war intact.
Ray is a retired Texas A&M worker of nearly 30 years.
He and his wife, Jean, live in Bryan.
It is indeed an honor to have Sergeant Ray Valigura on Veterans of the Valley.
Ray, thank you for joining us.
Let's go back.
You told me when you were 17 years old, you were attending a funeral of an uncle, and that's when you heard about the bombing of Pearl Harbor.
Talk about that and sort of take us how your career led from then to being inducted and eventually over to Europe.
Yes, that was December the 7th, 1941.
Yes, sir.
My family attended my uncle's funeral.
And there at the cemetery, the word came out that the Japanese had bombed Pearl Harbor.
And of course, it kind of stunned everyone.
Some of the guys were already in training because they anticipated war maybe in Europe.
But anyway...
After that, I worked on a farm for my dad.
We had a 140-acre farm.
I had five brothers older than I am.
And they were all married and out on their own.
So dad and I were sort of left alone.
And there it was almost certainly that I would have to wind up in the service.
So anyway, he rented out the farm.
which he and I were both glad we didn't have to work it.
And...
I was inducted into service January 1943.
I went to Fort Sam Houston.
After a few days, they issued us our equipment and things that were necessary.
And a group of us were shipped out to Camp House, Texas, north of Dallas, near Gainesville.
And there, the 86th Black Hawk Division was activated.
And I had the privilege of serving 42 months in the same unit.
Then after our basic training, we took some training out into the open field for gun range and so forth, and physical training.
And...
After all of this took place, well, I was assigned to a machine gun squad and a heavy weapons company.
And from there, we went to Louisiana Maneuvers, where we pulled actual combat conditions there for three months.
And then after that, we were shipped to San Luis Obispo, California for amphibious landing training.
Thinking at the time that you might be going to the Pacific at that time.
Yes, we anticipated we were going to be in the Pacific theater of war.
Right.
But in the meantime, they had other plans, evidently, for the invasion of Europe.
And...
We were shipped instead across the United States to Camp Miles Standish in Boston, Massachusetts.
And from there we loaded ships, equipment that we might need.
And the D-Day invasion had already taken place the time before.
And we landed in Lahore, France.
And from there, we were issued all equipment that was necessary, vehicles and so forth.
And we started our fighting across France.
We crossed the Rhine River at Cologne and fought into Germany.
Then fighting on through Germany, we'd taken villages and towns and so forth.
Of course, at the time, we didn't know much about where we were,
of where the locations were.
We took our orders and we just carried those things out.
Right, right.
And anyway, we crossed the Danube as a unit, the first unit to cross the Danube River in Engelstadt, Germany.
And from there on we fought and then we were under the command of General George Patton.
And his theory was he wants you to get the enemy on the run to keep him moving
where they can reorganize and counterattack.
Right, and you told me.
Which was a good system because we probably ran into a lot lighter resistance in most cases.
Yeah, you told me over a week's time, or over 20 days' time, you went 100 miles.
That's not far in 20 days, but you kept moving a little bit at a time every day.
Yes, that was what happened.
We were rushed, and we covered, we were later told around 100 miles
in a little over 20 days.
And most of that was on foot.
Riflemen were mostly on foot.
Of course, we in a heavy weapons company, we had vehicles to carry our machine gun mortars and trailers for ammunition.
But we moved fast.
But we later found out what it wound up was aid to the Belgian bulge.
And there, after things were sort of taken over and under control, we remained in the Third Army and we spearheaded around what was known as the Ruhr Valley of Germany.
That's where most of their factories and military equipment was made.
And the 9th Army from the east spearheaded around the other part of the valley.
And we surrounded that.
And we later learned that probably through this operation that the war may have been shortened from eight months to a year because the Germans were cut short of
equipment remanufactured and weapons and whatever they needed.
So the Ruhr Valley
was the area where it was their industrial area is really where a lot of their military equipment was made, where it was stored.
Yes, it was a mountainous area and a lot of factories underground.
Exactly.
And some of the places our bombers and artillery couldn't reach.
But anyway, after this was done, the resistance started becoming lighter and lighter from the German army.
And we moved on and we were in Austria at the foot of the Elf Mountains when we got word that Germany had unconditionally surrendered.
And it was about this time that you also witnessed some of what we talked about on the outset.
You witnessed the liberation.
As a matter of fact, your units were involved in the liberation of POW concentration camps.
Yes, we liberated some camps there where they had some of our prisoners that they had even taken from the Salerno beach that they established in Italy.
And some of those boys were prisoners there.
And we talked to some of them, and they told us that they anticipated maybe the war was coming to an end because they heard the bombardment, the planes coming over, and they had hope.
And I had one boy tell me, he said, you know what I had for breakfast this morning?
He said, I had a piece of bread and a warm glass of milk just to kind of keep my insides open so I could eat later on.
And then we liberated some concentration camps, which was a very tragic and disturbing experience.
These people were near starvation.
They were weakened.
They were ill.
And as we were liberating them, they were marching.
As we were moving in at Convoy, they were marching in single files back to an area where they could be taken care of properly.
And we issued them some rations that we had available.
They tried to hug and kiss us, showed their gratitude.
But we were warned not to make contact with them because of disease, parasites, and they had experience and so forth.
Right.
So after all of this experience, we wound up back in France.
And it wasn't but a few days, maybe two weeks, that we were reorganized and shipped home as a unit.
They told us we would be given 30-day leave and we would reorganize in Camp Gruber, Oklahoma.
And after this took place, we were to meet in Fort Ord, California, to be shipped to the Pacific for the invasion of Japan, as we were probably scheduled to do after our amphibious landing training.
But anyway, in the meantime, when I came home for 30-day leave,
I happened to go to a country dance hall and I saw this young, beautiful lady in pink dress dancing with another girl.
Of course, I guess they didn't have many boys to dance with because most of them were off in service and so forth.
But anyway, I kept her on my mind.
I finally found out her name, Jean Ripple.
She lived in the neighborhood at that time.
She was working in Austin, but she was home.
And I thought about her, and then we shipped to the Pacific.
We were three days out of San Francisco when we heard that they dropped the atomic bomb.
Well, what's the atomic bomb?
But anyway, we found out what terrible destruction it had.
Then one or two days later, they dropped the second bomb, Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
And then they began to anticipate that Japan would surrender.
So they stopped us in Manila Harbor in the Philippines.
And there we disembarked.
And we did some mopping up operations.
there in the Philippines on Leyte and Mindanao.
And we did pick up some prisoners.
We hadn't been notified that the war was over.
You told me some prisoners came up behind you when you were playing a game of pinochle one time.
Yes, we were on patrol, the four of us in a jeep, sort of checking out the tickets where they might be hiding.
And we didn't have much to do, so we sat down under a tree.
One of them had a deck of cards with them.
We played pinochle.
And while we were entertained with that, we heard a noise behind us.
We wheeled around, and there was four Japanese soldiers.
They didn't have weapons.
They had their hands over their head, and they were surrendering to us.
That could have been a drastic ending for us right there.
But somehow they got the word that they were being picked up.
And we brought them in.
They put them on KP and our company, and they did the KP work for us.
And we were waiting in the meantime to be shipped back home
The transportation of ships was very scarce because they were in the process of moving the troops in from Europe.
And then we were waiting to get transportation shipping, which was around four or five months.
that we waited.
Right.
In the meantime, we did other things there.
We organized to play baseball.
They had a big baseball stadium there in Manila.
Those people were baseball minded.
And we had some big league baseball players in different service units around the area where they organized teams and we watched them play.
They had a big stadium there seated about 40,000 people.
You told me some of the people that later became Major League Baseball stars at the time.
Well, there were some big leaguers.
For example, Kirby Higbee was in our outfit.
He was a pitcher for the Brooklyn Dodgers.
Right.
And pitchers like Gerald Staley, Yul Blackwell, Dominic DiMaggio, Joseph.
Demandio's brother, he was in the Navy, and he played with them, and there was quite a large group of those big league players in service, and they organized, and they had sort of like a World Series between themselves, and we got to see all of that.
You were a left fielder, right?
You played left field?
Yes, on our team I played left field.
And we played ball quite a bit while we were waiting.
Right, right, right.
And then we finally got the ownership to come home.
We landed in San Francisco again.
And...
were shipped to our port of embarkation, I mean the port where we were inducted, and where I went to Fort Sam Houston again in San Antonio.
After a few days I got my honorable discharge.
I went home.
And the dead wasn't farming anymore,
I went to work at the Pepsi-Cola bottling plant in Caldwell.
Yes, sir.
And later I worked at the Western Auto Associates store.
And then I opened my own business in appliance repairs.
And then through a friend, I learned that there has been some openings here at Texas A&M University.
And I applied for air conditioning and refrigeration job, which I got.
And I worked there 21 years.
Wow.
I returned in 1985.
I want to stop you there because I want to go to some pictures that you supplied to us.
And then when we come back, I want you to talk about going back to a dance hall in Dimebox and finding Jean Ripple again.
And that worked out really well, about what, some 59 years later coming up this next August.
But I want to go to some pictures right now that you supplied to us here.
First off, I think that we're going to start with, you can look right over there and see the pictures.
That's a young, 21 years old in that picture.
Blue-eyed, fine-looking soldier there of the 86th Blackhawk Division, Sergeant Ray Valagura.
That's a fine picture.
No wonder Gene was interested.
Now this is a newspaper clipping.
of y'all coming back from, was it coming back from Europe or coming back from Manila?
That's from coming back from Europe.
Coming back from Europe.
After the Germans surrendered.
Right.
And we came back on four transports with the one you see there, I was on the James Parker.
I think there were four boats that you came over and James Parker was one of them.
Transported our division of over almost 15,000 men.
And they threw quite a party for you when you got back to the States.
I want to talk about that in a little bit also.
Let's move on to the next picture.
You're not in this picture.
This picture is from a magazine of the 86 Blackhawk Division, but this is the type of machine gun that you used, right?
Probably somewhere in that group.
Uh-huh.
Big barrel.
Now those machine guns not only on the ground, but they also fitted on the back of Jeeps also, is that right?
Sort of like a tripod?
Tripod mounted, our own vehicle mount we had.
So your division, you both shot the machine guns and drove the Jeeps and everybody did a little bit of everything, right?
Yes.
Indeed.
This is your shadow box of your awards, your medals.
And a lot of those are European theater medals and good conduct medals and World War II medals.
But the one in the, I want you to talk about the ones in the middle, the bronze star medal, and then the rifle in the cluster below that, the blue, because I know those are the two that you're the proudest of.
Infantry badge.
Those are the photographs.
Talk about the bronze star medal.
How did you receive that?
Well, we were in a move coming off of a hilltop at that particular time.
And we got shelled heavily by artillery and machine guns far from the Germans.
And, of course, we were sort of caught by surprise.
One of the officers yelled to get the vehicles off of the hilltop away from the barrage because we loaded with ammunition and our troops were all around gathered around our riflemen.
It could have been a disaster if one of those ammunition trucks or jeeps were hit of explosion.
So he yelled to get those vehicles back over the hill.
And when I helped with that,
And under this artillery barrage and the rifle and machine gun fire, I was in a group to move those vehicles out of the danger zone.
And I was recommended for the Bronze Star for this section, which I received.
And you're very proud of that.
And then we saw a minute ago.
I feel like I wasn't doing any more but taking orders and doing my job and what other guys were doing.
But I appreciated the recognition on this part.
Right.
You told me that when you were young that the witnessing of the concentration camps and the POW camps, it didn't mean a whole lot to you then, but as you have grown older and think about it more, that the memories of that really flood back.
It was a difficult part of the horror of war that you remember now.
Talk a little bit more about that if you can.
Yes, you see pictures now of the skeletons and all these people of the torture they went through.
Well, you can believe every bit of that.
Because I've seen most of that and I saw a lot of that.
And it was a very tragic and disturbing thing to see.
And I would like to mention that
Now that the war is going on, I would like to see that things could be settled in other ways.
Right.
Beside war, nothing but tragic.
Because when you think back, not only the enemy, but your comrades, young men in their prime, being wounded, screaming in pain and help.
calling for their parents to come get them.
What little consciousness they had.
Those kind of things are very disturbing.
You kind of accepted that at the time, but
As you think over it now, you think of the boys as what they have to go through.
And also I have two grandsons, Brian and Matthew Swick.
And I'm so thankful that so far they hadn't faced those kind of situations because it's a hardship on the families and a torment on the youngsters and sometimes the cost of their lives or physical abilities.
Very well said.
I want you to talk more about your family in a minute, but I want to go back to Europe.
And you talked about an incident where it was near the end of the war and you were driving, bypassing Paris.
You were in a truck, a three-quarter ton truck, and the brakes went out.
Talk about that story.
Yeah, that was, while we were in combat in France, after so much time and on the front lines,
You got relieved and got to move back where you could have cooked food and hot food and so forth.
And while we were in the rest area, they called for some volunteers to go back to Laharv and pick up some vehicles that we needed.
And about 30 of us volunteered.
And when we got there, we each was assigned a vehicle.
I was assigned a three-quarter ton Dodge weapons carrier.
And after we started out, I found out I didn't have any brakes.
So I drove it the best I could.
I used the emergency brake and geared it down and so forth.
But I finally got word to the convoy leader that I didn't have any brakes.
And he told me, he said, do the best you can.
And if you wreck it, just get in the vehicle behind you because
We were limited on time and also getting out of, you know, a danger zone.
And I finally got the truck back, but I did leave it.
I didn't want any more part of it.
I went back to the company where we were supposed to be.
So while other people were celebrating the end of the war and kissing the girls, you were worried about your breaks.
People in France were celebrating.
They were glad to see us.
You know, most of Paris was bypassed because of the recognition of not destroying, you know, sort of a historical place.
And I think the enemy sort of took it that way too.
But anyway, we drove through Paris on the way back.
That's one of the reasons I went.
I wanted to see it.
more of Paris because we bypassed a few miles on the way to a fighting.
And as we drove through Paris, we went under the rifle tower.
Yes, sir.
And there was people four deep in the streets waving and shouting joy.
You know, they were liberated from the German occupation.
And I did drive under the Eiffel Tower, but I don't remember much about it because I had to watch so I didn't run over somebody.
Because you were out of breaks.
Let's go to Dimebox in that dance hall again where you saw Gene Ripple again.
Okay.
You were sold then, right, because you all got married soon after that.
After I saw her on my 30-day leave, she was on my mind.
And after I got home and got discharged, I went to work.
Well, I went to some dances in the area.
It happened to be Dimebox Dancehall Dance.
And there she was.
again so i asked her to dance we got acquainted and we got to dating for some time and we got engaged and we were married august 3rd 1947 and this august 3rd we'll be married 59 years joyous life we had a daughter
Her family, she's married to Les Swick, Debbie Swick and Les Swick.
Had two grandsons, Brian, that's now working in Charleston, South Carolina, where his wife is going to medical school.
And he's planning to...
Get his master's degree as he graduated from the University of Texas.
Went four years there.
And Matthew, the younger grandson, he is finishing his schoolwork at Blend College here in Bryan.
I know you're very proud of all of them.
For some 21, 22 years, you worked at Texas A&M in the air conditioning and heating unit under the physical plant, right?
I had a wonderful life after I think back over it.
There were some anxious moments.
Yes, sir.
I'm thankful that I made it without any disabilities or major injuries.
Think about some of the guys that had to go through all of this with serious injuries.
I'm very thankful that I made it have a wonderful family, wonderful home, and enjoy my internment.
And you were mildly wounded in the war with some shrapnel wound, but you're the first to say that it was... Yes, I had slight shrapnel wound, but I never went to the medics because we had some medication with us, wound powders and so forth we could apply.
in case we were in an area where didn't have any medics.
Might have worked on someone more seriously injured.
And the main reason I didn't go to the medics, I wanted to stay with the unit.
You know, once you went to the medics, they might have shipped you to a hospital, then you'd be assigned to some other unit.
I was with this group.
over three years, and I wanted to stay with them.
So I tested out a little bit.
Ray, we're out of time, but I want to thank you very much.
You also were a ticket taker at Kyle Field for several years.
We didn't get a chance to talk about that, but thank you for being our guest on Veterans of the Valley.
Thank you, Ray.
I appreciate your interest and help.
Thank you.
Ray Valigura proudly served his country and his community.
And this university, like most soldiers of World War II, he talks with emotion and respect of the men he served alongside, he of his 86th Black Hawk Division.
We salute Sergeant Ray Valigura for his service, and we thank all veterans.
And thanks to our underwriter, First National Bank.
And be sure to read more stories of veterans that you know in the Brazos Valley, in Brazos Valley Heroes, each Sunday in the Eagle.
For Ray Valigura, I'm Tom Turbiville.
We'll see you next time on Veterans of the Valley.